# 1. Clean install and initial setup

For a truly clean install, you'll want to install Skyrim outside of the following directories:

- `C:\Program Files\`
- `C:\Program Files (x86)\`
- `C:\Users\`
- `C:\Windows\`

The reason you'd want this is because some of the tooling, or the way mods themselves work, might conflict with these paths, which are restricted paths in Windows. If you're doing this on Linux, similarly you wouldn't install it to directories like `/opt/` or `/tmp/` or `/dev/`.

If you need a secondary Steam Library location on the same drive as your usual `C:\Program Files (x86)\Steam\` installation location, please see the following.

## Option A: Edit `libraryfolders.vdf`

0. Close Steam.
1. Create the directory. E.g. `C:\my_new_steam_library\steamapps\`
2. Locate your existing `libraryfolders.vdf`. It should be at `C:\Program Files (x86)\Steam\steamapps\libraryfolders.vdf`.
3. Edit the file. Copy the last entry in the file (e.g. `1 "C:\Program Files (x86)\Steam"`) and paste it as a new line, changing the number and path (e.g. `2 "C:\my_new_steam_library"`).
4. Restart Steam.

## Option B: Using the Console in Steam.

0. Close Steam.
1. Create the directory. E.g. `C:\my_new_steam_library\steamapps\`
2. Press `WIN + R` to open the Run dialog.
3. Enter the command `steam://open/console` and hit `Enter`.
4. Steam should launch you into a hidden Console tab with a CLI.
5. Run the command `library_folder_add [DIRECTORY]`. E.g. `library_folder_add C:\my_new_steam_library\`. You should get an ouput: `Mounted path "C:\my_new_steam_library" : index [something].`.
6. Restart Steam.

---

## Clean Installation

**Once you have a Steam Library outside of the restricted directories, you can proceed with installation.**

To get a pristine install, uninstall Skyrim from Steam and nuke any existing Skyrim Special Edition directory in any of your `steamapps` libraries.

Then, reinstall Skyrim from Steam and launch the game **once**.

After launching the game for the first time, with AE, you'll download 74 Creations from the Creation Club. We will be letting MO2 manage this in the next section.

Once you have finished downloading the AE Creations, your main menu in Skyrim should be the Empire symbol in gold, not silver like without AE.

Once you have reached this state, you may exit Skyrim. From here on out, you may start Skyrim to do testing at any time except for sections where the guide tells you explicitly not to restart between changes.

It is also wise to do a full backup of the `Data` directory in Skyrim. Specifically, the `/Data` directory located at `.../steamapps/common/Skyrim Special Edition/Data/`. This is called the `Data` directory and will be referenced as such.

The `Data` directory should contain all `.esm`, `.esp`, `.esl`, and `.bsa` files relevant to Skyrim, including:

- `Skyrim.esm`, which is the main Skyrim Master file;
- `Dragonborn.esm`, `Hearthfire.esm`, and `Dawnguard.esm`, which are DLC Masters for Dragonborn, Hearthfire, and Dawnguard respectively (these are older DLCs that have since been bundled with SE/AE.);
- `cc<...>.esl` and `cc<...>.esm` files, which is the Creation Club content bundled with AE. You should have a combined total of 74 `.esm` and `.esl` files. You should also have exactly one `.bsa` file for each `.esl` or `.esm` in the Data directory with the same `cc<...>` code. E.g. `ccbgssse037-curios.esl` has an associated `ccbgssse037-curios.bsa`;
- Miscellaneous `.bsa` files for Skyrim itself;
- `_ResourcePack.bsa` and `_ResourcePack.esl` files, the `ShaderCache` directory, the `Video` directory, `Update.esm`, and a `MarketplaceTextures.bsa` file.