# 4. Mods and modding guide

Welcome to the actual modlist and modding guide that is used to create Serenity's Skyrim.

Before you get started with installing these mods, please ensure that you follow the Clean install (section 1) and Pre-modding (section 3) guides as that is the basis with which this modlist is built on.

This guide is split into multiple parts, and gets much easier after we've done some things to make installing new mods a breeze.

## Goals

If you aren't interested, you can skip this part.

The single goal of this guide, as mentioned in earlier sections, is to create a modding installation that is [idempotent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence) and [reproducible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducibility).

While those two words are complicated, what it boils down to is the idea that if you were to boot up a fresh, brand new instance of MO2, do a little bit of setup, then copy over the entire instance directory from another directory, or from another machine entirely, MO2 will know how to install all of your mods appropriately and immediately give you your Skyrim installation without having to meddle with anything else.

The benefits of this is that you can back up your Skyrim installation. In its entirety. No more having to pre-install SKSE or mess around with ENB after this very first initial installation. If you package the instance name properly, you should also be able to trivially share your installs with one another provided the mod files are also somehow included with the install (distribution rules on individual mods must still apply so either with an API downloader or something else).

The downside is that when you install something, you must do it through MO2. In my personal experience, this is oftentimes easy to do because Root Builder is just so good, but it can be frustrating if you're not used to doing things this particular way.

The eventual idea is to turn this into a Wabbajack-like thing, where all you need to do is to write a modlist file, maybe include some instructions on how to do the building, then it'll automatically go grab the files and do all the installations for you. Something like how [Nix](https://nixos.org/) works.

In fact, the idea is to eventually just... let you write a Nix config for Skyrim modding.

Technically, right now, if you've followed sections 1 and 3, you have a reproducible and idempotent Skyrim install. It's just that the modlist is empty so nothing gets installed on top of base AE + SKSE.

## Sections

You can also skip this part if you're not interested in how the modlist and guide is organised.

The guide itself has multiple parts, and we focus primarily on the more complex parts first. This way, when we want to add a new mod, chances are we don't need to install a dependency and we can simply click our way through the installation process.

This means that the earlier parts of the guide are complex and require your fullest attention. But after that, it's honestly really whatever.

The sections themselves are spaced out to which specific area of the game we want to affect.

We start off with some of the more impactful things. Like ENB, USSEP and the core Body mods since we care about our own character the most. That then extends naturally into engine and game fixes with all the physics stuff we need to do. After that, since we're doing visuals, we do Lighting, World, and Texture overhauls, then we go on to doing the Gameplay stuff, then Items and Armor, and finally NPCs, Companions, and Housing.

That being said, you don't actually have to follow the guide after you do the core stuff. Once you install the physics and fixes, you can honestly do whatever you want. What is put here is just stuff that I suggest in order to achieve the modding result below.

## Modding Result

Obviously, this is an extensive modpack. Early estimates put the mod count at somewhere in the high 300s, and no part of the game remains untouched. This should feel *like* an Elder Scrolls 6.

In terms of system requirements, Skyrim is indeed a relatively old game and so it can take a lot of pushing as well. The majority of this modlist was built a year ago on an RTX 2070 Super with an i7 8700K.

I have since upgraded to using an RTX 5070ti and an AMD Ryzen 7 9800X3D, but the performance should be tuned for the specs about a year ago, so you can just use that as a baseline for the modlist.

As always, you should do some performance testing and tuning of your own, but if my old PC supported it, then yours ideally should too.

Beyond that, we overhaul as much as we can. Every town gets one, as many NPCs as we can, as many questlines as we can. And on top of that are the DLC sized mods as well. You'll see each of these as you go down the list.

## The List

This is obviously an extensive list, and as you can see on directory tree, it's already split into multiple parts. You should also be liberal with your use of seperators. My personal seperators setup is as follows:

[divider image here]

For each category, there is a Fixes, Core, and Extensions seperator. E.g. Visuals - Fixes, or Lighting and Weather - Core

The only exceptions to this are the the Root Mods, Core Mods and Libraries, and Racemenu categories.

The list is as follows:

- Root Mods
- Core Mods and Libraries
- User Interface
- Visuals
- Audio
- Body
- World
- Lighting and Weather
- Textures and Meshes
- Animations
- Locations
- AI
- Racemenu - Core
- Racemenu - Presets
- NPCs
- Gameplay and Immersion
- Items, Armour, and Economy
- Skills, Perks, and Spells
- Quests

There are also three additional separators. Override, Override - Priority, and New Mods.

New Mods is all the way at the bottom, and is where new mods installed by MO2 will go. I like having this because it separates my existing mods with the ones I have just installed. Useful for installing a bunch in a row and ensuring they go in the right order.

Override and Override - Priority are self-explanatory. Whenever a mod requires you to do some funky "Make sure its at the bottom" thing, just stuff it here, depending on how bottom it needs to go. Having two override separators like this makes things much more convenient.