# ENBSeries

ENB (or ENBSeries) is a set of post-processing tools that hook into Skyrim's rendering engine in order to perform various effects like anti-aliasing, sharpening, and all the other goodies you'd expect in the Graphics menu in a AAA game's settings screen.

## ENB vs. ENBSeries vs. ENB Preset

To avoid confusion, we should differentiate between ENB and ENBSeries. In this guide specifically, when I mention ENBSeries, I'm talking about the actual tool itself. The one that you get from [this website](http://enbdev.com).

And when I mention ENB, I'm talking about the specific settings preset that we use to make our world look gorgeous. Specifically, we will be using [this preset, Cabbage ENB for NAT 3 Weather](https://www.nexusmods.com/skyrimspecialedition/mods/103042).

This section of the guide specifically deals in installing ENBSeries using Root Builder and MO2.

## Installing ENBSeries

Because we are aiming for an idempotent and reproducible install, we need to install ENBSeries as a root mod using Root Builder in MO2. The steps are similar to installing SKSE, which you should already have done.

The only difference is that before you drop the archive file into MO2, you need to open the archive and delete the `enbseries_sdk.zip` that exists inside the downloaded `enbseries_skyrimse_vXXXX.zip` archive file. This is because MO2 is too smart for its own good, and tries to recursively unpack archive files when it detects an invalid `Data` directory structure, which all root mods are.

The step-by-step process for doing so is as follows.

### Installation Steps

You should have ideally already followed the SKSE installation guide to build familiarity with Root Builder.

1. Download the latest ENBSeries from [this website](http://enbdev.com) (at time of writing, it should be version 0.504).
2. Open the archive using your tool of choice. Optionally make a backup of it first if you want to.
3. Delete the `enbseries_sdk.zip` inner archive file from the archive.
4. Close your archive tool of choice.
5. Open MO2 and install the mod as you would a regular root mod. MO2 should pop up a dialog with a warning about the content not being valid.
6. Inside `WrapperVersion/Data`, create a `Root` directory inside `Data`, next to `Textures`.
7. Drag the `enbseries` directory, `d3d11.dll`, `d3dcompiler_46e.dll`, `enblocal.ini`, `enbseries.ini`, all `.fx` files, all `.bmp` files, and all `.dds` files into the `Root` directory. You can leave the two `.txt` files and `.url` files outside of the directory.
8. Right click the `Data` directory and click "Set as \<data\> directory".
9. Optionally rename it to whatever you want (I renamed to ENBSeries). Click "OK".
10. Drag the newly installed mod to near the top of your load order. I recommend that you put it right below where you have SKSE in your load order.
11. Launch Skyrim. If you did everything right, you should have a few info messages on the top left.
12. To truly confirm that you've done it right, you can hit `SHIFT + ENTER` to open the ENBSeries configuration menu. Then, open the Skyrim console and key in `coc whiterun`. You should load into an area near Whiterun with some random Nord character. Check that everything is running fine.
13. Exit Skyrim.
14. Right click your Overwrite mod (all the way at the bottom of MO2) and create a mod, name it whatever you want. This mod contains all the configs generated by ENBSeries' first launch and you'll want to keep it right below the ENBSeries root mod in your load order. You'll get a invalid data/missing data warning, but you can right click the mod in MO2 to ignore it.

And then you're done!

## A note on Reshade

While I personally do use Reshade for this install, because you can't put Reshade into MO2 or Root Builder since it's an external program, it contravenes the restrictions of idempotency and reproducibility we're aiming for in this modpack.

The good news is that not having Reshade won't break your install. It'll just not look as what I have on my system.